Aten Primaria. 2020;52(10):794- - -795
www.elsevier.es/ap
Atención Primaria
SCIENTIFIC LETTER
The perception of family doctors on college drinking
and their expected role: A cross-sectional survey
La percepción de los médicos de familia sobre el consumo de alcohol en la
universidad
 y su papel esperado: una encuesta transversal
Eun Gyeong Lee a, Sang Yeoup Lee a,b,∗, Young Hye Cho a
a Family Medicine Clinic, and Research Institute of Convergence of Biomedical Science and T echnology , Pusan National University
Y angsan
 Hospital, Y angsan, Republic of Korea
b Department of Medical Education, Pusan National University School of Medicine, Y angsan, Republic of Korea
Available
 online 30 May 2020
Although many attempts have been made to prevent drink-
ing
 problems of college students, the college drinking
culture
 is becoming more decadent.1 --- 3The purpose of this
cross-sectional
 study was to investigate their perception and
necessity
 for the intervention of family doctors working at
teaching
 hospitals on problematic drinking in college stu-
dents.
The
 subjects were 145 family medicine faculty members
who
 were working at teaching hospitals registered in the
Korean
 Academy of Family Medicine. Of the 145 subjects,
60
 (41.4%)
 were respondents. In August 2016, data were
obtained from online self-report questionnaire via e-mail.
Respondents’ demographic characteristics, their drinking
behavior ,
 their perception of college students’ drinking
problem,
 opinion on the college drinking policy, and com-
ments
 on alcohol education programs were collected.
Of
 the respondents, 40 (66.7%) were men and the aver-
age
 age was 43.8 ± 7.8 years. All men of respondents drank
alcohol,
 the most frequent being 2 --- 3 times per week, while
women
 drank less than once a month. Most respondents
∗ Corresponding author .
E-mail address: saylee@pnu.edu (S.Y . Lee).
drank 1 --- 2 standard drinks per drinking episode. Thirty-seven
(61.7%)
 responded that there are moderate problems with
college
 drinking. Nine (15.0%) stated that college drinking is
a
 serious problem. Eighteen (30.0%) respondents answered
that
 the biggest problem with college drinking was during
the
 welcome party for new students (30.0%). Among those
who
 were aware of the drinking policy in their college, 76.9%
said their college has a drinking policy, but the policy was not
being
 strictly implemented at the campus, and all respon-
dents
 mentioned that the policy should be strengthened in
the
 future.
Fortunately,
 98.3% of the respondents agreed with the
necessity of family doctor to educate about the drinking
problem
 of college students. Most of the respondents (90%)
stated
 that they are willing to participate if they are asked to
provide
 educational sessions about college students’ drink-
ing
 problems. Also, most of the respondents expected that
it
 could be improved by education on all drinking problems
of
 college students. Especially, it was expected that the vio-
lation
 of law and accidents caused by drunk driving would
be
 improved the most.
Table 1 shows the opinions on various drinking policies
that
 can be implemented in the college. Most of the respon-
dents
 strongly agreed to abstain from bringing alcohol to
campus
 or dormitories, prohibiting alcohol advertisements,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aprim.2020.04.004
0212-6567/© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Espa˜na, S.L.U. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

The perception of family doctors on college drinking and their expected role: A cross-sectional survey 795
T able
 1 Respondents’ suggestions to identify college students with problem drinking.
Classiﬁcation Suggestions for concrete methods
Screening tools -  Using questionnaires to screen problematic drinkers: routinely (e.g. before each
semester registration, after each semester) or frequently
-
 Interviewing with students’ parents or friends
-
 Interview with students who are habitually late/absent from school
-
 Interview with a tutor
-
 Regular counseling sessions with a specialist
-
 Attending school events or meetings to identify drinking behavior and problematic
drinkers
Visit
 to clinic -  Even if the college patient has visited the hospital for any reason other than drinking,
family doctor should ﬁrst enquire about their drinking behavior
- Ask if the college patient has experienced a blackout during the interview
Policy and budget - Connect the college counseling center with the family medicine clinic for screened
students
-
 The University plays a pivotal role and works with the community physicians such as
family
 doctors to conduct counseling and preventive programs for problematic drinking
by
 budgets from the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health and Welfare
strictly enforcing leisure or cultural activities without drink-
ing
 sessions, or clarifying the drinking rules, etc. Fifty-eight
patients (98.7%) agreed that family doctors need to include
drinking
 counseling for college students with an essential
management
 ﬁeld. In addition, respondents suggested the
use
 of screening questionnaires such as the AUDIT4 to rec-
ommend
 visits to the clinic at least once with policies and
expanded budget as screening tools to identify problem
drinkers
 among college students.
Family
 doctor
 has sufﬁcient competence necessary to
provide high-quality care
 for college students including alco-
hol counseling. A previous American study5 reported that a
primary
 care doctor-led alcohol education counseling pro-
gram consisting of
 15-min counseling sessions twice a month
reduced the frequency of drinking
 among heavy college
drinkers.
We can conclude that family doctors highly agree with
the
 necessity for screening for drinking behavior as well
as
 providing alcohol counseling to college students and the
development of effective programs to prevent problematic
drinking
 and promoting a healthy drinking culture. There-
fore,
 it is hoped that university stakeholders will actively
utilize
 primary doctors’ resources to solve college student
drinking
 problems.
Funding
None.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that there is no conﬂict of interest
regarding
 the publication of this article.
References
1. Foxcroft DR, Tsertsvadze A. Universal school-based prevention
programs for alcohol misuse in young people. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2011;11:CD009113.
2. Ickes MJ, Haider T, Sharma M. Alcohol abuse prevention programs
in college students. J Subst Us. 2015;20:208- - -27.
3. Kim KH, Kim YH, Roh SG, Kim JH. Drinking culture among korean
college students. J Korea Acad Industr Coop Soc. 2011;12:4932- - -9.
4.
 Patton
 R, Deluca P, Kaner E, Newbury-Birch D, Phillips T,
Drummond C. Alcohol screening and brief intervention for
adolescents: The how, what and where of reducing alcohol con-
sumption and related harm among young people. Alcohol Alcohol.
2014;49:207- - -12.
5. Fleming MF , Balousek SL, Grossberg PM, Mund MP , Brown D, Wiegel
JR, et al. Brief physician advice for heavy drinking college stu-
dents: a randomized controlled trial in college health clinics. J
Stud Alcohol Drugs. 2010;71:23- - -31.